So something just arrived in the mail. I'm very excited about it.
It's this huge humongous thing here some of you may be familiar with it -
It's a Klein bottle.
It's a humongous Klein bottle cost me a couple of thousand dollars
Definitely worth it as you can see I'm pretty nuts about these things I've got like a pretty huge collection of Klein bottles
I'll just put a couple here on the table. You know as many as could fit in this frame!
Basically here, and so I want to talk a little bit about Klein bottles. Why I'm nuts about them?
but also
We want to do something. You know do something related to what we've been doing before so
I've put Rubik's cubes in bottles
and today the final thing I'm going to do is I'm going to put some Rubik's cubes in Klein bottles.
It's going to be something all right, so I think before we start talking about these these various bottles,
I better give you an explanation of what it's all about mathematically.
Let me tell you a little bit about what makes these Klein bottle interesting,
Mathematicians are really nuts about them,
so what we do to build one,
We just take a sheet of paper well not paper, some flexible material and do this, okay?
So we'll bring the red edges together make them into a tube
And then we connect up the yellow circles in a special way, okay?
If you just bring them together like this we get a like a donut shape
But we can do this in a second way
and that gives the Klein bottle. Let's have a look, so we extend out like this and then extend and
together comes the Klein bottle okay?
Alright, so that's one way of building it the other way actually focuses on the yellow edges first
Okay, so let's just go straight to that
So what I'll do here is I'll take a rectangle
that's a bit thinner to start with okay, and then the way the yellow edges are brought together is
Well as there's just two different ways
and so you could just do like this and you get a nice ring
Or you could give it a twist and bring it together like this
And that's of course something that pretty much everybody who watches this I guess knows
This is a Mobius strip all right, and what's special about a Mobius strip?
I mean you start out with two sides,
and when you connect like this
When you connect like this, white gets connected to white and yellow is connected to yellow and you get two sides again
But when you kind of switch over like that you actually connect the two sides
So you connect the white side to the yellow side the yellow side to the white side and actually now what you get here is
a one-sided surface okay, so if you take two different points like one point here and
Like on the opposite side you can actually travel from here to there by walking along the surface, okay?
So just walking along the surface
So that's that's something very special a one-sided surface one sided surface
Okay, now the Klein bottle is actually just a mobius strip,
extended in such a way that eventually the
the two edges come together and merge together
Okay, let's just have a look at how that works so first we connect this up into a Mobius strip in a special way
So what we have to do is
We have to connect
The yellow point to the green point and the green point to the yellow point, and we do this in a special way here
So with the twist is kind of hidden a little bit okay, so goes like that just extend it out
Bring it around and now you can see if I just extend this out
those two points are going to get
Merged those two points going to get merge and you get a Mobius strip okay,
and now let's just go into our real starting position
Which is basically this so there's your Mobius strip, okay?
And now we kind of extend things out,
So we extend things out we extend further we extend further we extend further and if you just extend a little bit further
It's all going to come together and you're going to get your Klein bottle
What's nice about the Klein bottle is that doesn't have any edges whatsoever? It's like a sphere basically
It's like a sphere doesn't have any edges
It's a closed surface as opposed to one with an edge the mobius strip. So that makes it somewhat special, okay?
Okay, now
Klein bottles they actually don't live in our world.
They really live in four dimensions, and they're really I mean these sorts of guys they really feel uncomfortable here
They're really kind of crammed into three dimensions, and you can see it here kind of they're kind of clash into it themselves
They don't want to do this, they want to be like like donut shapes. Donut shapes, they don't clash into themselves
They want to be like that and in four dimensions. They can be like this. I just want to show you
How you actually get the fourth dimension in here? So if you've got a figure eight living in a plane, all right?
Now there's got a clash here
If you want to get rid of this clash what you do is you kind of just take a little bit of this
This figure eight here and kind of raise
It slowly up into the third dimension and bring it back in like
we've kind of built a bridge and all of a sudden the whole thing doesn't clash into itself you can do the same [sort] of
Thing here with the Klein bottle so what you do is at this stage here
You kind of push things off slowly into the fourth dimension
And you kind of just go across like in the fourth dimension kind of building a bridge in the fourth dimension
and then
well from our perspective it just seems to vanish here right
From the perspective of somebody who lives in here the curves just seems to vanish and then to reappear, but it's still there
It's still there in three-dimensional space same sort of thing is possible here for a Klein bottle
So here it just kind of starts vanishing
But it's actually still there in the fourth dimension goes across and you don't get this running into itself
So this is really a four dimensional creature, and it's a one sided surface
And there's a couple of other things that are really amazing about it. So one of them
Which not just mathematicians find amazing, but just about anybody finds amazing is that they provide
You know a hint
that the universe we live in might actually have a very strange property and I just want to show you this
By looking at a mobius strip real quick. So here's a really really big mobius strip okay, and
Let's say there is a creature living in here
So there's like our two-dimensional man lives in here, and that mobius strip that it doesn't have any
third dimension it's just that it's there.
But it doesn't have any third dimension. So what we can do is this man
Here is we can let him travel around the Mobius strip, okay?
so let's just let him travel around the Mobius strip
and now he kind of just turns on the spot and
Now something amazing has happened
but just walking around a mobius strip this man has actually turned into his mirror image, so
Something similar is theoretically possible in our universe that we kind of go off for a trip through the universe
We come back and we come back mirror reversed
It could theoretically
Happen, and it could happen in a kind of a three-dimensional counterpart of of the Klein bottle so that's what makes Klein bottles interesting
For new Mathematicians and also you know I hope
Everybody watches here. It gives you basically a space a
Flat analog of of the three-dimensional universe we live in
That has this special property that if you kind of just walk around in the right way
You kind of turn into your mirror image, and you know you won't feel it
You won't feel it that you know you'll feel perfectly fine all the way throughout the trip, but you know I come back it's strange
So let's get serious about putting some
Rubik's Cube in Klein bottles and
talking just in general a little bit about about my collection here, so
What have I got here, I've got
Different sizes, so this is kind of just straightforward shape basically four different sizes here
Well really five if I've got all of these really small ones here, so there's another one
So five different sizes you can use them for in earrings or pendants or whatever now. They're all made from glass by real glass blowers
Pretty much all of these come from a place in California
I'm going to put a link somewhere here
So they're all coming from California. I've got one here this one came from the UK so,
They actually attached something here, so they can use the Klein bottle as a
Drinking vessel and then I've got something very strange here
three Klein bottles kind of merge together like this very strange
Then I've got a Klein bottle opener so you can actually open beer bottles like this
Which is actually 3D printed.
And it's in metal and there's another 3D printed version just from plastic, and this is something that I use on a daily basis
So this is my Klein bottle mug
So if you actually have a really really close look
This is actually a real mug, and you can see that water's kind of sitting in here in a strange way
And that's basically you know the talos space.
Get some water in every once in a while, okay
now how do we get a
Rubik's Cube in a Klein bottle
Okay, so we want to get maybe this one here into this Klein bottle
I mean from the movie you maybe remember well this thing actually only has one side, right?
So it actually doesn't have an inside and an outside
Mathematically speaking, so pretty much you could just say well,
It but nobody will be impressed also. It's not really true. It's not really true because
while we're talking about a Klein bottle kind of squeezed into our 3D space
It would be true if we had what kind of you know doing this video in four dimensions
Then I mean there would really be no point to do anything with this thing
You know just be inside whichever way you look at it, right?
But because it's kind of squeezed into three dimensions. You can actually see well. There is really an inside here somehow, right?
There's really an inside so how do we get it into this space inside it looks hard and actually it would be completely impossible
Were it not for a strange flaw
Okay, let's let's be kind and call it feature of all these glass Klein bottles, okay?
So when you look at them
And when you remember so there's basically a tube going through to the inside here
And then there's a surface kind of cutting across here, so I mean here we've got this kind of circular
intersection so a circular intersection and really
What should be there it should two surfaces in two intersecting right, so this surface
And that surface here there should be intersecting and actually that hole should be closed
But it isn't you can actually get in through the tunnel here and move things to the inside
It's a floor. I guess. It's just very hard for for glassblower to get any sheet of of glass in here
So that's actually the case for all of these
all of these
Handmade glass bottles and strangely enough it's also the case for this plastic one. I mean for this plastic one
There's actually no excuse for not putting anything
But I guess whoever made this he just looked at the glass Klein bottle copied it and didn't realize that
He was actually making a mistake there now the person who made this one here
very famous 3d printing artist, Bathsheba Grossman
She got it right, so if you actually look in the hole here
So there's the surface cutting across so among all those things that I have here. It's really this is really the only one
That's you know perfect right in that sense, but I mean we're not really worried about this
We're actually pretty happy about this because at least there's a way in you know, so otherwise yeah, there's no hope
Okay, so how do we get something in?
Well was this large one
it's actually pretty easy, so I got to just kind of take it like this and I get a
small cube, maybe my favorite cube the 1x1x1, and I just kind of pop it in
alright, and it's in
Nobody will be impressed, well I think you'd still be impressed, by me holding this thing
So anyway, so you can get a cube in like this, but of course you want to want a real 3x3x3
okay, well that's that there's still a really really tricky way of doing it because I've got this really really small 3x3x3
So that's actually you know that's actually the smallest mass-produced
3x3x3 cube. That's just as big as
One of the little cubes that make up an ordinary one and you can really you know
twist the sides of this thing and can you scramble it up
And you can solve it and do all sorts of things. It's called a Nano Cube
So this one let's put it in probably a world first
There, a 3x3x3 in a Klein bottle just like that
Okay, but again
I mean you've never seen this before and I'm sure it's going to be very memorable you'll never forget this
Image of me throwing this thing in but still you know it's too easy. I mean, I could have done it
I mean this this one here
You only really impressed because I got this thing in that doesn't really fit through the hole alright
So we have to somehow get this a cube like this into one of those Klein bottles
Now I'm not going to use this one here because I mean if you've actually watched the video where I put this one in you
know
It's dangerous, sometimes I destroy these things in the process right, so I'm not going to use the several thousand dollar
Sample here of which only like two exists in the whole wide world
So I'm going to use one of the other ones right, so I've got quite a few of the other ones and so
What I thought I'd try is, I'm going to try and put
Something into this one here
Okay, so this one here and well
I mean this this 3x3x3, definitely doesn't fit in all right. So can't can't fit that one inside
and even larger one would be this 2x2x2 right so that that would I think just just just fit inside and
Well, I guess we could do another world first since I'm here we could put a Klein bottle inside a Klein bottle since we've got
It here. We might as well do it I've got this little Klein bottle here
Okay, so we're going to put a Klein bottle inside a Klein bottle, there it is, never seen before, world-first
All right, okay. Let's leave this in there. I think I might just leave this in there permanently and
Now I'm going to go away and then
And then I'm going to see what I can get this thing inside, okay?
alright. I'm back. I'm wearing my Klein bottle hat
Which you can get also for the place where we get these glass Klein bottles from so it's a very neat hat
So if you go inside, you pull
You can actually see the two kind of sliding inside so very nice anyway, so I succeeded
as you can see
The Rubik's Cube is in alright. The Rubik's Cube is in the Klein bottle and
let me just show you a little bit, so
Here it is right. I just kind of move it around a little bit here
Wow, okay, anyway
That's as far as we'll go. It's actually pretty tight fit. This way, so you know great stuff?